John Ellis: We're gonna start talking about, actually, how these models work.
John Ellis: Anybody know what this is?
John Ellis: Actually, you do, so what… what is this, Cheryl notes? It's how they work. This is… this is… this is the model. This is a transformer model. So what you're looking at here is actually…
John Ellis: The process and the rough architecture.
John Ellis: of what's called a decoder transformer. This is ChatGPT, and this is what's happening Under the hood.
John Ellis: So I'm going to need to have your buy-in for about… for the next hour, we're going to dive into how these models work.
John Ellis: By understanding how the models work, you'll actually have a much better handle on what are good decisions and bad decisions about how to use the models.
John Ellis: And you'll also understand some of the oddities about working with the models that might not have been understandable or clear before.
John Ellis: So, but first, I'm going to have to have your approval. Are we in to look at… to look at this and get into the technical for about an hour, so then we can get to the applications a little bit later? Okay. Show of hands, please.
John Ellis: Alright, anybody opposed?
John Ellis: Alright, motion carries, we're gonna dive in. Here we go!
John Ellis: Generative AI models are deep learning models.
John Ellis: So this means that actually what you're really looking at here, especially under here, is… A deep neural network.
John Ellis: This is different from just software, in that there's not code.
John Ellis: that runs, right? So this is different because there are not rules and software that's written in order to have the model do what it's going to be doing.
John Ellis: And it has to go through some steps that you might not actually count on.
John Ellis: So here, context. This is where you put in the chat. We're going to do chat first, then we're going to do agents a little bit closer to the end.
John Ellis: So, this can be anything.
John Ellis: Right? This is where you may… you might even upload a document here, but this is where you start the chat.
John Ellis: Funny thing about deep learning models, they can only deal with numbers. Ever.
John Ellis: So this means one of the very first things that has to happen is a token encoding. This is taking
John Ellis: The individual words and breaking them down.
John Ellis: into, breaking them down into parts. These are called tokens, these are words or subwords.
John Ellis: Why do you need to do that? You need to do that because you then need to put them into a token embedded.
John Ellis: Hmm.
John Ellis: Here's how to think about it.
John Ellis: Those of you who've heard me introduce this before, what's… what's sitting right here? What's the word or the concept right here?
John Ellis: It's king! Yes, exactly, it's king! And it's sitting here in space, and the other words around it are very much like king. What are some of the other words?
John Ellis: Royalty, absolutely.
John Ellis: Monarch? Love it.
John Ellis: President? Queen?
John Ellis: Leader? Absolutely. So all of those are somewhere nearby. This is a semantic space.
John Ellis: So, the locations have meanings.
John Ellis: And the tokens, the first guess of what they are, land exactly there. So, why do I call them embeddings, and why do I represent them like this? Because it's their location in the space, it's a vector.
John Ellis: Just like in here, I could say I'm about 2 meters up.
John Ellis: I'm about 6 meters from the wall, and let's see, from the back wall, and I'm about, what, 10 meters from the side wall. That's…
John Ellis: That's… those are my coordinates.
John Ellis: But here, when we're talking about this embedding space, we're talking about thousands, perhaps thousands of dimensions, so enormous dimensionality.
John Ellis: and the locations have meaning. The interesting thing is.
John Ellis: You can do math in this space.
John Ellis: So let's take King, I'm gonna take man… man sitting over here. I'm gonna take king, subtract man.
John Ellis: Where am I now?
John Ellis: Right.
John Ellis: Part Queen. Anybody disagree?
John Ellis: Have I added woman yet?
John Ellis: Oh, so King Minus Man is… y'all gave me some good words before.
John Ellis: Ruler, royalty, crown, right? That is the ungendered king, right? Now let's add woman.
John Ellis: Now, where am I?
John Ellis: Now I'm a queen, absolutely. So you can do math, you can average, what's, what's on the average between king and queen?
John Ellis: These models, deep learning models, can do math on this in a useful way.
John Ellis: So at this level, what we're going to say is, they turned into embeddings, magic happens… Yes, we will get more details.
John Ellis: And then, we get token probabilities.
John Ellis: So remember, instead of talking about words, we're talking about tokens, right? So…
John Ellis: Tokens are words or subwords. This is sort of a vocabulary that you decide on before you get started. Once you decide on your token vocabulary, you're stuck with it, so you can't change afterwards. It's not necessarily learned, this is just a decision that you make. That cat is going to be 42.
John Ellis: Dog is going to be 63. You actually decide this, and you try to make it, and so you can represent as many common words and concepts with single tokens, but sometimes you have to go to multiple tokens for a word, because you can't put a token on every single word, and misspelling.
John Ellis: So, it's gonna be words or something.
John Ellis: So what happens at this point is the model, and this is all that the model does.
John Ellis: Is produce a probability distribution over the next token.
John Ellis: So what is most likely going to come at this point?
John Ellis: And then, what happens is…
John Ellis: Actually, you add a little bit of noise here. You don't choose, maybe, the most
John Ellis: The most likely word, most probable word.
John Ellis: You had a little bit of noise, and you're gonna see why in a moment, and then you make the next word prediction, and then you have one word.
John Ellis: But this is at odds with our experience, isn't it?
John Ellis: Because we don't never… we never get just single-word responses from the models. What do you suppose is happening?
John Ellis: Multiple predictions? Oh, wait… now you said multiple predictions, but you did something with your hand. What did you do? You went like this. What does that mean?
John Ellis: My next.
John Ellis: You take the word that you chose, you put it back in the context, and you rerun.
John Ellis: When models are responding to you, this is called autoregressive, the models are walking.
John Ellis: a response. I choose this word, I choose the next, I choose this word.
John Ellis: of autoregressive, and the models are generating a longer response by actually choosing words in turn. How do you know when the model… how do you suppose the model knows when to stop?
John Ellis: It could keep on producing words, Same.
John Ellis: Oh, it could be the same words, could be.
John Ellis: How about predicts a period.
John Ellis: Matter of fact, there's a special token called End of sequence.
John Ellis: When it produces end of sequence, it says, I'm done.
John Ellis: And then stops.
John Ellis: This underlying technology has not changed since these models were first introduced to the wider public by Google in 2017 in a paper called Intention is All You Need. 2017, things have not changed. This is the architecture. Let's go a little bit more into the innards of the architecture.
John Ellis: So here we go.
John Ellis: And… and here you're gonna pick up some, some, some additional words.
John Ellis: Two things happen in the decoder stack.
John Ellis: One is… Words that come before the current word influence the current word.
John Ellis: I'll give you an example.
John Ellis: She looked across the board and said, triumphantly, King.
John Ellis: Am I in the right place?
John Ellis: It's the word king, but it's at the right location. She looked across the board and said triumphantly, King Me.
John Ellis: Is that even a… a noun?
John Ellis: The use?
John Ellis: It's a verb, right? Okay, so I'm in totally the wrong place. How do I know this? Because of the words that came before. I'm talking about
John Ellis: First of all, it's playing the role of a verb rather than a noun.
John Ellis: What are we talking about here?
John Ellis: like a game, because it's board, and she said it triumphantly, so it's something… so it's something like that. I need to be closer to where the board is, right? I need to be closer to where the verb-like things are. How do I know that, and how do I get there? Because I take the words that came before, and it moves me by averaging.
John Ellis: I average some of the meaning from board.
John Ellis: And from triumphantly, and from the use of this as a verb to move where my representation is of king. I move my embedding.
John Ellis: That's one part. Now comes the knowledge part.
John Ellis: What has the word king and has to do with winning and a board?
John Ellis: Could be chess?
John Ellis: Checkers. Checkers!
John Ellis: Attention is the averaging of the information to get you in about the right place. MLP, this is called the multi-layer perceptron, a wonderful 50-cent word. Multilayer perceptron. This actually makes contact with the fact that we've been talking about these things really since the 70s and 80s. The technology is not new.
John Ellis: the algorithms are better, and there are a lot more MLPs than we had before, but this is where the knowledge is stored. It's not a database.
John Ellis: They're not doing a lookup to see where this is. Instead, this has to do with your location in the space, and it informs and moves you further. It enriches the meaning.
John Ellis: So you take the location where you are, so first of all, location is wrong place, attention puts it into more of the right place, then the MLT further informs and modifies that embedding, and so it moves it again. Now it puts it much closer to gaming.
John Ellis: And to board games, and to checkers.
John Ellis: That's one stack. Then we do it again.
John Ellis: Then we do it again.
John Ellis: Let me do it again.
John Ellis: The understanding and the representation improving each time as you go from stack to stack, and then you finally get to the point where you're going to make that probability, and you're gonna guess the next word. She looked across the board and said triumphantly.
John Ellis: Me.
John Ellis: And how do you know that? Because you're playing a game, you're winning, and when you say that in checkers, that means you expect to have another piece of your color put on top of your piece.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: So, let's talk about large language models.
John Ellis: That's a decoder transformer that is actually You're looking at ChatGPT?
John Ellis: But we keep on talking about large language models.
John Ellis: Well, here's a large…
John Ellis: language model. When we say large, we mean, quite literally, that the MLPs, the multi-layer perceptrons, are larger and can store more information.
John Ellis: Representationally, this is not a database, this is not a data store like this. This is storing the ish.
John Ellis: of the world.
John Ellis: How many of you remember JPEGs?
John Ellis: So remember, actually, the original digital cameras, remember this, actually could only ever take JPEGs, and they were always, like, fuzzy?
John Ellis: But it was kind of cool. And even still, now, you might get images from somebody and say, can you resend this? This is… this is fuzzy.
John Ellis: very fuzzy, less fuzzy.
John Ellis: MLPs are a fuzzy JPEG of the world.
John Ellis: If it has more space, Then it can do a better job of representing what's there.
John Ellis: Large language models, in addition to giving you more stacks, bigger attention.
John Ellis: Really grows because you have more and more multilayer perceptrons.
John Ellis: You know, bigger, wider, and it can represent and learn more about the world.
John Ellis: So, what are the differences between a large language model that cannot run, On one of these?
John Ellis: And a small language model which could run on one of these, or even on your laptop?
John Ellis: Well, one way is the world knowledge. It's gonna have less world knowledge, because it's gonna be like this.
John Ellis: Architecturally, it's going to be the same. It's going to have some less capabilities as well, because it's going to have fewer layers, but it's going to have the same type of capabilities. They're the same, but they tend to actually have fewer parameters.
John Ellis: Let me pause here. What questions do you have, based on your new understanding of transformer models, that's the underlying model.
John Ellis: and, generative AI.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Explain how difficult it is not made a special place. Sure.
John Ellis: So how MLP is not database-driven. When you actually look at this, when you look at what a multi-layer perceptron is.
John Ellis: Happens. Would you actually like to see the formal pseudocode?
John Ellis: For a transformer?
John Ellis: You want to see the real deal? I tend not to do this because it scares people.
John Ellis: But we're gonna do it.
John Ellis: Lovely.
John Ellis: Algorithm 10 of the Formal Algorithms for Transformers paper, you are looking at ChatGPT.
John Ellis: This is all of it.
John Ellis: This is it.
John Ellis: So when I say that there's not actually code there, that's what I mean. Instead, that knowledge that we're talking about, that knowledge of the world, is in line 8, right here.
John Ellis: This, I'll scroll that up so you can see it.
John Ellis: Line 8.
John Ellis: We can make it bigger.
John Ellis: This is a dense two-layer.
John Ellis: Feet forward?
John Ellis: network.
John Ellis: The knowledge is stored here.
John Ellis: In these weight matrices, So, there are no words there.
John Ellis: There's no specific data there. It is represented there. The models can learn representations, but there's no data to look up.
John Ellis: It is doing the math, And returning an enrichment of the tokens.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Bye.
John Ellis: What… what is different between… Like, the more…
John Ellis: data you put into it, like, it scales, like, what, how is it? Well, yeah, we had deep learning models since, like, the… you know, we had artificial neural nets since the 70s. We've had
John Ellis: you know, neural, you know, full-on neural nets since the 80s. We had, you know, you know, in the 2000s, we had really good, deep neural nets. Why did we not have ChatGPT?
John Ellis: Attention.
John Ellis: and attention used in this way. It turns out that the architecture, and it's going to be a little bit easier to see this back here, this architecture turned out to be THE key.
John Ellis: By putting together these same elements that we had for a while, in a new way.
John Ellis: We finally have the capability of a model that was of pretty good, pretty darn good, Learner.
John Ellis: So that was part of it.
John Ellis: We needed to have the algorithm where we could have a good learner. Second, we needed to have compute.
John Ellis: Where you could actually train these, because training the models is much more expensive and much harder than inferencing.
John Ellis: You just saw the algorithm, that's just straightforward math, but to train it, there's a lot more math that has to go on for it to even begin to learn.
John Ellis: And we'll go through an example of one training example in just a moment.
John Ellis: But we didn't have the compute that could actually do this at this scale at all.
John Ellis: You know, compute like this.
John Ellis: Well, to give you an idea, I want you to just go visit the, the Frontier, supercomputer down the road at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
John Ellis: And they have these large stacks, right, of these machines.
John Ellis: And the machine is not that old. One of those huge racks that draws 128 kilowatts of power
John Ellis: It's less powerful than this.
John Ellis: So we've come a long way, and so now we have the compute, finally, that we need to be able to do this. The final thing is, we changed the way that we changed the models.
John Ellis: We changed the way that we train the models, and here's an important part, and if you've heard me talk before, then,
John Ellis: Oh, wait a minute, actually, maybe it's not there.
John Ellis: Yes, okay, great.
John Ellis: So I'm gonna flash… I'm gonna flash this, sentence in front of you.
John Ellis: those of you who've been to run into the trainings like, I gotta change the sentence, but I just love Zora Niel Hurston, so I hate changing the example. But if you've done this before, don't answer.
John Ellis: Here's the task, and this was the task that we used to train the models.
John Ellis: Guess the next verb.
John Ellis: Guess the next token?
John Ellis: So I'm going to flash this, and…
John Ellis: I would very much like for you to respond very quickly, okay? Give me an answer, and bad answers are so much more useful than good answers. So if you think you have a bad answer, thank you, please say it out loud, okay? Agreement? Are we good?
John Ellis: I'm gonna flash this, guess the next word.
John Ellis: And I'm probing your deep neural net, so give me the… the thing just pops into your head.
John Ellis: Ships at a distance have every man's wish on.
John Ellis: Alright, so I heard star…
John Ellis: We have some good writers in here, I'm not gonna say the word that you're saying. So…
John Ellis: I heard shore… star… Now you're… okay, so now, okay.
John Ellis: Everything that you just said… is a noun. How'd you know that it should be a noun?
John Ellis: Alright, you have to think about it for a moment. If somebody's a grammarian here, they're gonna say, well… Preposition. There we go, it's going to be the object by the prepositional phrase. That's not really why, though, right? That's kind of like, we use that as the explanation of why we did the thing we did, but it has to… it's serving this purpose. We know that because
John Ellis: of the previous context. We've got to learn how to use this previous context to know that it's got to be a noun-like thing. Second, every noun that you chose had something to do with some information in the sentence, the semantics.
John Ellis: So, either with being far away, you know, ashore, wishing on a star, you know, on the deck, on board, all these things have to do with the semantics here. So, in other words, in order to even get closer, you've got to know the semantics of what's going on here. You've got to learn the semantics.
John Ellis: Finally, Which is better, on shore?
John Ellis: on… On, on, on Horizon, On deck or on board?
John Ellis: Or…
John Ellis: on board. Why? Okay, so which part of the sentence do I have to pay attention to, to get to that?
John Ellis: on board. Ships. So, ships is going to be really important here. I've got to learn, I need to attend to pay attention to ship.
John Ellis: And borrow from the semantics of that to shape what comes here. And indeed, yes, ships on the horizon have every man's wish on board.
John Ellis: Okay, final one. I heard on deck and on board, which is better?
John Ellis: Every man's, ships at a distance have every man's wish on deck. Ships at a distance have every man's wish on board.
John Ellis: Bored is prettier. Bored is prettier!
John Ellis: Bored is… is… is more… poetic.
John Ellis: On deck is concrete, so in addition to even get the right, right word, we have to know about those different styles of writing.
John Ellis: maybe know a little bit about Zora Neale Hurston. I know that she made commentary, right? She was an anthropologist. She's not… she's making broad commentary here, so yes, it's on board.
John Ellis: Great. Those are all the things you can learn, or have to learn, in order to get that word right.
John Ellis: This is called self-supervised learning. This is how the models are trained.
John Ellis: It has to learn about everything that's carried, all the information which is carried, in order to learn how to
John Ellis: guess that next word. Where does that information go? That information goes into Right in here.
John Ellis: Into the multi-layer perceptrons.
John Ellis: Again, these are not facts. This is not… Zora Neale Hurston's first line of her novel, Their Eyes Were Watching God, is the following.
John Ellis: It's…
John Ellis: hey, when words are like this, ships have things that are… they have decks, they also… you can say there's a phrase on board, it's more metaphorical, here's the meanings of… of all the different words that are here. When they're put together in this way, attend to this part, not this part.
John Ellis: Then do the math.
John Ellis: And make the prediction.
John Ellis: This is why the models
John Ellis: don't necessarily have the specifics, but they know generally what's correct. Was there a question over here? But it's both, because you can reproduce long segments of tactically probably… Oh, yeah, if your MLP is big enough, right?
John Ellis: Yeah. You can get… if you train enough on it, yeah, if you train enough, you can, but there's not enough room to store everything. So it has to do with the frequency with which you train.
John Ellis: And how well you trained on it, but that's not going to happen with everything that you put in.
John Ellis: So what that indicates is that they trained a lot on that text, which they probably did not know, right?
John Ellis: They trained a lot on it, because it was high quality. So they trained on it multiple times, which means
John Ellis: It was stored here and stored so strongly that it
John Ellis: was drawn to do it, so this is the sharp part of the fuzzy JPEG.
John Ellis: All right, so… Oh, yeah, go ahead. When you say store, that means store W.
John Ellis: Yes, it's stored in… it's stored in the parameters.
John Ellis: There's no text, it's all learned in the parameters. Now, we're talking about immense numbers. We're talking about anywhere on the order, for the larger models, 500 billion different numbers.
John Ellis: To a trillion different numbers.
John Ellis: Extremely large.
John Ellis: But let's think about what you trained on.
John Ellis: You trained on text from the internet.
John Ellis: Among other things.
John Ellis: You ever run across anything on the internet that was…
John Ellis: Wrong. Wrong. So that's all there, and the model learns and represents that information here.
John Ellis: So this is not something that you can simply extract or correct, it's sitting there.
John Ellis: Models can be aligned, and so they respond more safely, more appropriately. Absent that, it is going to be just based on what they were trained on. There is no code there to change.
John Ellis: It is simply what they're trained. So, and also, even if they're aligned to respond in a different way, no, that is still there.
John Ellis: It is a mirror held up to ourselves.
John Ellis: And everything…
John Ellis: Which we have written and created, it's probably trained on, so all that stuff is there. And that's important to keep in mind with the models.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: So… Like, I have tried better, just, I guess, when they got better at being different to you.
John Ellis: what's correct? What's incorrect? Like, where… where does that… So here's…
John Ellis: let me answer right there, because that was just perfect. So…
John Ellis: It is always producing something which has a high probability, which is plausible.
John Ellis: So, and I've just said.
John Ellis: that unless you add something else here, it only has the fuzzy JPEG of the world.
John Ellis: So when people say that the models are problematic because they hallucinate, The bad news is.
John Ellis: That's all it ever does.
John Ellis: It is always and only hallucinate.
John Ellis: Now, you can kind of make the point that it's not too different from actually how we do it.
John Ellis: But absent additional tooling.
John Ellis: it's not… it's going to give you something which is positive, and the more that you push it for things that it's not heavily trained on, if it's been trained on a particular book for a long time, it might be able to get very, very precise.
John Ellis: A great example, though, is when you take a model that has no other tools, and you say, hey, can you find me a reference?
John Ellis: And then it gives you…
John Ellis: an author that's about a right. It gives you the title, which is about right, the journal is about right, and it has plausible-sounding issue numbers and everything, and you're joyful, because it's exactly what you needed. It fit… it…
John Ellis: It fit exactly with what you asked it about.
John Ellis: And then it produced something which was very probable.
John Ellis: And then you're shocked, because it doesn't actually exist.
John Ellis: So this is the problem. It's not that it is all of a sudden it's hallucinating, it's that it has no additional information.
John Ellis: So where can that additional information come from so it can do a better job?
John Ellis: These can only get so big.
John Ellis: And frankly, if you… you only train at specific times because it's expensive to do.
John Ellis: Takes a lot of power.
John Ellis: Takes water to train.
John Ellis: Not so much when you're inferencing, but definitely when you're training. It takes those resources, and when you train, you also run the risk of forgetting other things. So the answer is not just train it more.
John Ellis: Well, an interesting thing has happened over the last couple of years. These context windows have gotten longer.
John Ellis: So now you have in Claude, for example, 200,000. In Gemini, and also in Claude, now you have a million tokens. This is multiple big book chapters. This is multiple papers, this is huge amounts of text, and remember what we talked about? Attention?
John Ellis: If the information exists here, attention can draw from it and give you a much better answer.
John Ellis: So, if you know the answer to the following, please, please don't say it, but
John Ellis: First of all, I'll say, how many people watched the Super Bowl?
John Ellis: So I'm originally from Seattle, it was kind of thrilling to see, I'm sorry for whatever the other team was. But,
John Ellis: What?
John Ellis: And if you know the answer to this, don't say it. What's the… what's the capital of the state of Washington?
John Ellis: You know what you want to say.
John Ellis: You're gonna say, it's like, Seattle, that's the best you got. All right, please do the following. If you don't know the answer, pull out your phone.
John Ellis: Seriously, follow your phone… Google it!
John Ellis: Nope.
John Ellis: Did you know?
John Ellis: I didn't have any, I agree.
John Ellis: All right, I'm gonna ask you… who here has gotten the answer?
John Ellis: Anybody? Okay, great. What is the capital of the state of Washington?
John Ellis: Olympia.
John Ellis: And you know that because you looked it up. And I didn't have to tell you exactly how to do it, I said, look it up.
John Ellis: Well, what if we gave the models the ability to look it up?
John Ellis: The model can know when it's being asked something precise.
John Ellis: And then actually just make the call to look it up, put it into the context window.
John Ellis: So now the context window looks like, just like it was for you.
John Ellis: what's the… what's the capital of the state of Washington?
John Ellis: And then you said, looking up on phone.
John Ellis: Google says Olympia, and then you respond.
John Ellis: Olympia is the capital of the state of Washington.
John Ellis: So the models, when augmented by tools, have the ability to do a much better job. If the model is not augmented by tools, you ought not to be using it like
John Ellis: Google.
John Ellis: Because you're going to get the fuzzy JPEG answer.
John Ellis: You're gonna get, sort of, the learned knowledge here, which may or may not be correct.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: you make transformers relatively intuitive, and yet I understand the magic in the black box is something we still don't understand. So with mechanistic interpretability, what are we still trying to figure out? Okay, so…
John Ellis: And the question here is, in particular, around understanding what's happening, because a lot of this is buried. We're going to be talking about agent skills in just a little bit, and that's going to be one way to actually get more insight into what's happening with the models. But truthfully, what's happening with the models here is not happening at the weights level.
John Ellis: If, if we… if we take a look at,
John Ellis: Oh, actually, the, oh, I have it right here.
John Ellis: We take a look at here.
John Ellis: really what's happening here is, is right here. These are called the activations.
John Ellis: Right? We… to understand what's happening with the models, it's not going to be in what's stored in the weights, because,
John Ellis: Because the weights store lots of different information. Each number can actually inform the meaning of many different things. It's like a palimpsest. Writing on writing on writing.
John Ellis: So you're not going to be able to look at the weights to tell what's going on. Instead, you have to look at what the model… what the activations are.
John Ellis: we're actually going to be starting up a generative AI graduate certificate.
John Ellis: If you want to really get into this, you can do that. It's going to be, should be part of the employee tuition program, so do that if you want to really, really deep, go deep dive into this. But the issue here is you need to analyze these. There are many more numbers here than there are weights.
John Ellis: It gets even larger. And there's an approach, mathematical approach, to actually look at what those activations mean, to get an idea of what the model is representing, and how it is actually solving the problems it's solving. Very early days for this, though, still.
John Ellis: But at least it gives us some insight into that black box.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: So when people talk about, like, That post-training or fine-tuning? Yes.
John Ellis: So… Everything that we talked about in terms of Guessing the word, board.
John Ellis: is pre-training. This is where the model learns language, learns semantic, learns facts, learns about the world. Alignment comes after that.
John Ellis: Alignment is sometimes in the same kind of way where it's guessing the next word, but sometimes can be something which is called reinforcement learning.
John Ellis: And this is more… shapes how the model should be responding.
John Ellis: Models that have no post-training are very blunt.
John Ellis: Right? They give you the answer, and that's it. They don't say hello, they don't, you know, put it into a full sentence, no need to, it's just guessing the next word.
John Ellis: It doesn't even know when you're asking a question.
John Ellis: So if you ask a question like.
John Ellis: what is the capital of the state of Washington, the model may very well say.
John Ellis: Because I'm interested in rainy weather, and I want to know, you know.
John Ellis: it will continue your question, because it doesn't know. So alignment, post-alignment, can first call.
John Ellis: Through additional training, teach it, About questions and about tasks.
John Ellis: Reinforcement learning can teach it about safe responses versus unsafe responses, can teach it about appropriate responses,
John Ellis: You know, sometimes it can, it can, trendy to be more helpful.
John Ellis: That is alignment. That is shaping what the model does.
John Ellis: Transformers were around for a long time, for years before ChatGPT hit. ChatGPT was… trained it on, on understanding queries.
John Ellis: and aligned it to chat, rather than just giving answers. And when those two things came together, we all of a sudden understood how to interact with it, and that opened the doors.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Then let's talk about tooling.
John Ellis: Actually, let's talk about something else first.
John Ellis: How many people
John Ellis: have either been in a class, or taught a class, where you have an extremely eager student who is ready to answer.
John Ellis: And you ask a question, and before you get to the end of the question, you know, they're ready to go, right?
John Ellis: In your opinion, are these the most considered Answers?
John Ellis: No, no, right? I mean, it's gonna be an answer, but it's gonna be… they're snapping it out, it's…
John Ellis: you know.
John Ellis: So… Models up until the point where
John Ellis: Models up until the point where, where we changed some of their Post-training, answered only like that.
John Ellis: They only ever immediately spat out that first prediction in answer to your question.
John Ellis: Models, base models, up until about a year ago, were this.
John Ellis: Then what we got, though, was reasoning models.
John Ellis: Here's how it works.
John Ellis: When someone asks you a really tough question, just to personify just first a little bit.
John Ellis: Do you immediately respond, or do you sort of have an internal monologue
John Ellis: First, especially if it's a tough question, one that requires thought.
John Ellis: So, alright, I've been asked about
John Ellis: the future of AI and what's going to be happening next. Well, what have we talked about already? What do I know about it? Was there something I've been thinking about recently about cool things that are going to be happening? How should I respond?
John Ellis: okay, I know this, oh, and I did read this article.
John Ellis: This is what I'm gonna go with.
John Ellis: Now I respond.
John Ellis: the internal model.
John Ellis: Thinking models, reasoning models, have that internal monologue. And they produce what's called a thinking token.
John Ellis: The thinking token puts it into a mode where it's not necessarily showing you what it's thinking, although sometimes you can click and see what it's doing.
John Ellis: The thinking token is the AI equivalent of the hand.
John Ellis: Hold on.
John Ellis: All right, so now what do they ask?
John Ellis: They asked me this, let me think about the knowledge that I have, let me go through this answer, I could make this response, or this response, that response is terrible, this is probably the best response.
John Ellis: And then answer.
John Ellis: The reasoning token, the thinking token, is meant to put the model into a mode where it has been aligned to actually reason in a very basic kind of way. In a way that I call McReasoning.
John Ellis: It's like, it's basic, it's not that advanced, but it often gets the job done, and then when it's ready, it has an end-thinking token, and then begins to respond. That's a reasoning model. Most models nowadays actually can do both.
John Ellis: You can interact with it. It used to be you had to choose the model that was the reasoning model versus the non-reasoning. Now, many models can flexibly go between the two.
John Ellis: And based on what you're asking, if it has not much of an idea of how to respond, it'll enter into thinking mode first. All that's happening is…
John Ellis: It's taking what it thought, And putting it into context.
John Ellis: So a lot of this is about getting better and better context.
John Ellis: And it turns out this is the way to understand not only reasoning models, but even agents as well.
John Ellis: It's all about putting into context that crucial information that, when applied to attention.
John Ellis: Can actually do the thing that you need it to do.
John Ellis: Let's talk about tools.
John Ellis: Tools are… Just like we talked about, Tools are…
John Ellis: The model being able to produce special.
John Ellis: Text, which gets picked up by a framework.
John Ellis: to do certain things. So it can actually make a call out to do a Google search. So it can say, hey, do a Google search. That gets picked up. Outside of the system, the Google search is carried out, and then the result is put back in.
John Ellis: I've been asked about the… I've been asked about, you know, the…
John Ellis: capital of the state of Washington. I'm gonna say Seattle, but I'm gonna do a Google search.
John Ellis: The capital of the state of Washington is Olympia.
John Ellis: Now I have a different answer.
John Ellis: And I'm going to respond differently because I've enriched my own context. Math!
John Ellis: That's a funny one.
John Ellis: People often get confused because they think the models are running on computers, and they only run on numbers, that they're going to be really good at math.
John Ellis: But do you remember the strawberry, how many R's in strawberry? And it was like, man, these bottles are no good, because I can't count the number of R's. Well…
John Ellis: First of all, tokens.
John Ellis: So, strawberry could be a single token.
John Ellis: So now it has to process that a very different way. And even counting.
John Ellis: 412.
John Ellis: Do you see the… do you see the number 12 around a lot?
John Ellis: I see it all over, like, a dozen, dozen… I see 12 all the time, right? Let's go and give that a token number of 93.
John Ellis: 12 is the token 93. 4, I see 4 a lot, too. Let's go and give that one the token number of 82.
John Ellis: Oh, you're asking me what 412 plus 1 is?
John Ellis: Alright, what concept am I near?
John Ellis: when I say, the token embedding for 4, or the token embedding of 12,
John Ellis: Now, I've got to combine the concepts and mend those, because I only represent those vectors, that's all I'm doing.
John Ellis: And now I'm going to depend on, have I seen someplace in my training data enough times a 412 plus 1 for me to get that right?
John Ellis: That's how the model does it if it has no access to tools. That's a nearly impossible task.
John Ellis: So what do you do?
John Ellis: Call a calculator.
John Ellis: You're asking about math, go ahead and call a calculator. You don't have a calculator, write some computer code. Have it run the computer code.
John Ellis: print 412 plus 1, it goes in the context, it now knows what the answer is, and then can respond.
John Ellis: Think about how different this is from us.
John Ellis: This is a very different kind of intelligence.
John Ellis: And this is kind of a challenge that we never thought that we would see.
John Ellis: One other thing that I'll mention before we start getting into tying this all together into agents is…
John Ellis: We talked about having 200,000 tokens here, a million tokens, so lots of space here, so… and we can populate it in a good way to get better answers
John Ellis: What's our working memory?
John Ellis: How many concepts can we hold in our mind?
John Ellis: At once.
John Ellis: And sort of hold them all, and compare them all.
John Ellis: Anybody know how many?
John Ellis: Depends on me. Like, 7, plus or minus 2, that's George Miller, and then later, actually, closer to, like, Simon, like, closer to 4, you know, so very small, but we are extremely limited in our attention.
John Ellis: The processes that we use to consider and to harness and to reason about vast amounts of information
John Ellis: our heuristics, chunking… Very different kinds of processes. Here, all that there is!
John Ellis: Is the context And the token encodings. And then the token embeddings, that's all.
John Ellis: Think of this intelligence as sort of crystalline.
John Ellis: Right?
John Ellis: You add, you recalculate, and you get a new version.
John Ellis: Us were always dynamic, so we thought that intelligence would have to be something that would be dynamic.
John Ellis: I'm a cognitive psychologist. I do mathematical… I did mathematical psychology, and I always thought that it was going to look very different than it is now. So this is one of the reasons why, when we work with AIs, we need to think about it in these terms.
John Ellis: It does not page anthropomorphize.
John Ellis: It's different.
John Ellis: It is a different type of intelligence than we are used to.
John Ellis: The key point For us right now is…
John Ellis: You can make tool calls.
John Ellis: And we want to make sure that useful things get put into context.
John Ellis: And it doesn't matter if you're talking about text, or if you're talking about images, all of those can be tokenized. All of those can be represented as embeddings, so it's multimodal, depending on whether you trained it on the multimodal to begin with.
John Ellis: The key thing is… tools.
John Ellis: What kind of tools do we have? We have internet search, We have skills.
John Ellis: We're gonna talk about those in just a moment. We have computer interaction.
John Ellis: So, it can write code, and run code in a special place.
John Ellis: to actually calculate what the answer is, and to populate the context. It can do MCP, that stands for Model Context Protocol.
John Ellis: That's an easy way that, that, for models to ask for
John Ellis: data or for processing to be done by an external source, rather than have to write a custom API, which is a protocol to actually ask for things a particular way, you can ask in more plain language, hey, can you look up this person's name for me? Here are my credentials. But look up the name, you figure out how to do it.
John Ellis: That's Model Context Protocol. Works across models.
John Ellis: other tools. RAG, this is now older?
John Ellis: If you have questions about RAG, we can talk about that, and why we tend not to use it as much anymore.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: So that's tools. So what's an agent?
John Ellis: I'll come back to skills in a moment.
John Ellis: an agent… is, model.
John Ellis: plus tools.
John Ellis: plus a loop, And some autonomy.
John Ellis: It's really high-end.
John Ellis: So we pose a problem.
John Ellis: And we ask the model to go after a problem, and we allow it to go through
John Ellis: And to actually run the tools, and to assess, maybe write the code, it's often writing code.
John Ellis: And then to come back and actually only report back when it is ready.
John Ellis: So this is not a single run, it could actually be done and emit the
John Ellis: End of… end of sequence token.
John Ellis: Right? But it's actually running code over here, sometimes asynchronously. Sometimes it can have multiple agents that are running at the same time, to come back and then produce for us something.
John Ellis: Tools plus autonomy gives you an agent.
John Ellis: Questions before I start going on to, onto skills, which do play into this?
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Thought a little bit prior.
John Ellis: But how we can…
John Ellis: So nothing else here, so the question was about context and what's happening here. Nothing else here changes. It's the same architecture, it is what we call the agent harness around it.
John Ellis: So now, this model can actually write a file.
John Ellis: So let's say you're asking it to consider something, and it's a big, long problem. It might make itself a task list.
John Ellis: Matter of fact, you may actually have some guidance in there saying, hey, if somebody asks you to do a big task, make a task list first. Go into thinking mode.
John Ellis: Consider the task at hand. Make some external files so you don't have to try to keep track of everything in context.
John Ellis: And always return to the task list. When you're done, when you think you're done, return to the task list, make sure that it's all completed. If not, then pick up the next task.
John Ellis: That's the hardest. That's outside of this. That's stuff that you can kind of do if you're doing ChatGPT, but it's effortful.
John Ellis: You did this, now do the following, copy, paste, copy, paste. Now, that is more automated.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Yes. We're comparing for a damage.
John Ellis: There's just thinking, and those pro have access to more 2.7.
John Ellis: So what, what, what, what, what tools does ChatGPT Pro or ChatGPT EDU have? Quite, quite a few tools.
John Ellis: And sometimes you have to turn them on, but it does have computer interaction, it can have its own little, you know, place to write code. Kind of interesting thing, though, right? You don't get to say what libraries are loaded up there, or anything like that, or you can't load anything there, so it's only for its own personal use.
John Ellis: It turns out everybody has adopted skills, and I'll introduce those in a moment. So it has… you almost have to look to see what it has available. So the real caution is, if you use a model, if it has no tools.
John Ellis: that should severely restrict how you think about what it's going to be doing. It's going to be doing a lot more plausible answers than actually approval. Nice thing about these kinds of, like, computer… if it writes computer code, now you have traceability.
John Ellis: Right? Now you can actually go and assess what it did and how it solved it.
John Ellis: Now we start having more confidence in what it's doing, because we can actually inspect and watch what it's doing.
John Ellis: Other questions, yes?
John Ellis: Comment on this feature in the main tools, chat GPT Cloud Complexity. It offers deep research.
John Ellis: Yes. Yep.
John Ellis: Why is that there?
John Ellis: No, absolutely, and we're going to be talking a little bit more in depth about this a little bit later, too, but I'm happy to talk about it now. Think about this. If you…
John Ellis: If you want to have some real,
John Ellis: I'm trying to describe this without using the word deep research. If you want to go and you want to do a substantial dive into a particular topic, right?
John Ellis: You're gonna want to have something which is going to go in a very tight loop, and look at things, and try to…
John Ellis: Get the broad span of what's happening, find resources from reputable sources, and actually go through
John Ellis: lasso all that information, and then present it to you in a usable, actionable form. That's deep research. It is a very particular agent.
John Ellis: On a very tight agentic loop.
John Ellis: Which is going after a particular problem that you have phrased. So in there is going to be a special hidden prompt that you're not going to see.
John Ellis: It is absolutely going to have very advanced search.
John Ellis: And it's gonna be a line, and actually have instructions to do very particular types of search.
John Ellis: So that, that, in essence of deep research, different groups do, different, companies do this in different ways, but it is an agent. It's… matter of fact, it was one of the first agents that we had.
John Ellis: With a specialized model that did dense, very tight-looped work.
John Ellis: Because think of it, this is what you do, right? If you're going after a topic, you look in this, you see if it leads anyplace else, you assess it to see whether it actually answers or doesn't answer your question, you try to assess it, then you go to the next one. You might actually follow down some of the references here, and then you may stop and say, I'm not seeing anything new.
John Ellis: So now I'm gonna go over here. I'm gonna look just
John Ellis: So that type of research, that type loop.
John Ellis: Is something that, that, that we have done.
John Ellis: That's what the model is doing.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Alright, then I have a question for you.
John Ellis: How does a model new… know
John Ellis: It knows what it's supposed to do. You've asked to take on a task. Write me a program, solve this problem. How does it know
John Ellis: How to do that thing.
John Ellis: Honestly, like, I never have the back end of this, but if it has internet research, it clearly looks for how to do stuff, so it comes back and does that. Okay, so I could look it up.
John Ellis: Okay, if you're a faculty member, would you be happy with your student not just sort of looking up how to do a particular type of analysis, say, statistical analysis, and whatever they find on the internet, just go with it?
John Ellis: Not really, right? You really would not want to do that. Instead, you would want to have a prescribed set
John Ellis: of… Approaches, process knowledge, or specific domain knowledge of how to do this thing.
John Ellis: MLP is not going to cut it.
John Ellis: The multi-layer perceptron is a fuzzy JPEG,
John Ellis: It knows all the different ways of doing things, including all the very wrong ways of doing things.
John Ellis: This is where skills come in.
John Ellis: We're going to be taking a much deeper look at skills in just a little bit, but know the following. Skills are a collection of human-authored, by and large, human-authored
John Ellis: documents On how to do things.
John Ellis: And here's how you think about it.
John Ellis: Skills, you can have a large collection of skills that tell you how to do a particular thing. Could be an analysis, could be a particular type of work, we're going to see lots of different examples of this.
John Ellis: What the model does is… You ask it to do something.
John Ellis: And the first thing it does is assess whether or not there exists a skill
John Ellis: Which can give it guidance on how to do that thing.
John Ellis: which is the preferred way for you, your lab group, your organization, to solve a particular problem. It first looks to see if there's a standard, good way to do this. If it is, it takes up that one skill.
John Ellis: And puts it into the prompt.
John Ellis: But it only does so when you ask it to do that thing.
John Ellis: So it's dynamically loaded.
John Ellis: So this means it is sitting right next to the task
John Ellis: That the skill is meant to cover.
John Ellis: That's ideal.
John Ellis: That means attention is going to be acting on something which is close by.
John Ellis: And remember, the model doesn't have to follow the instructions, because remember, it is, you know, you saw the model works, but if it's sitting right there, and it speaks to directly how you're supposed to be doing this particular task, it will do it.
John Ellis: In addition, skills can also have pre-written Code.
John Ellis: So often the model will try to write code to solve a problem.
John Ellis: Fantastic. It can actually use the templated code, which it has here.
John Ellis: To actually write the code, and so now you're… things are becoming standardized.
John Ellis: It's human-readable. Can anybody guess what format, what… is this going to be a Word doc?
John Ellis: What do you think?
John Ellis: Markdown.
John Ellis: It's Markdown.
John Ellis: Human readable.
John Ellis: I consider this to be an extremely important socio-technical advancement.
John Ellis: Because this does a couple of very important things. One, it gives us traceability. We're going to be talking just a little bit about human and AI interaction. It's important for that. It is human author
John Ellis: Recent research showed that skills work best when they are authored by human and by an expert. Why? Because we're trying to figure out what the model does not know. We're trying to augment what the model doesn't know. If an AI writes a skill.
John Ellis: It already knew how to do that.
John Ellis: This also means it invites people into the process of sharing that expertise and guiding. It makes it in so it's not so black box.
John Ellis: How is the model going to solve the problem? Well, if you don't have a skill, it could be anything. Could look it up on the internet.
John Ellis: Just try to wing it. If there is a skill, and especially if that skill gets called, you can have more confidence that it's actually following the outline that you have.
John Ellis: Doesn't solve everything, but this puts people into the loop in another place, and a very important place as well.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: there is already, in this part, like, in the three-scale version, right, a text that is hanging out in the context that ChatGPT or
John Ellis: Anthropic, or whoever else has been certified to sit
John Ellis: about the taxes, kind of, like, be a good research assistant, do good things, probably, like, it's like a… what is it called? Because of constitution.
John Ellis: Well, -oh, oh, I'll just be clear, so you're saying that there's some text in the context. Actually, often that is in the alignment. So you can also… also, another thing that can be done is you might have an additional system prompt.
John Ellis: Possibly.
John Ellis: Here's an interesting thing, is, those types of very directive prompts work less well when you have reasoning models. I guess what I'm saying is, I've often been in the vision of prefacing something and saying.
John Ellis: don't make stuff up. Right. Right? Like, but it also has an instruction that I can't access that says, be a helpful research assistant. So, like… Oh, and that's the… yeah.
John Ellis: And so then I get this thing, which is really fascinating, except for there's one, like, research ungrounded thing that's been inserted in the middle, because it's trying to be helpful. And so…
John Ellis: So that's one side of it. The transparency question is.
John Ellis: where can I click to see what are all the skills and what are all the prompts in my interaction? Oh, you're gonna like this. So what's interesting is.
John Ellis: Observability. You're gonna see in most of the agent workflows that we're gonna have, it shows you where and when it pulls up the skills, and which documents it's pulling into. So here's what's missing, right? We have these cool… we have this op… this,
John Ellis: all of this. But what's missing is we need to know when things are going in.
John Ellis: We need to know what is going in, so we can have more confidence. That's what an agent harness does.
John Ellis: It makes it more observable.
John Ellis: But something else I want to point out, which is really important, you can have alignment which will drive behavior in broad ways, and you can have these general statements which will broad, you know, broadly drive what's going on. If you have very well populated context, those are the guardrails.
John Ellis: Which forced the model to actually justify
John Ellis: What it's going to be responding, but only if you have good context.
John Ellis: So let's make the… let's link the… let's make the leap to what agents are now, modern day.
John Ellis: Remember that we had the AI-dedicated computer use? Model could do all the things, it could write code and then run things, but we didn't have access to this instance, right?
John Ellis: This is a computer in the cloud, we couldn't load anything, it was just, like, it's for its own use. What if, instead.
John Ellis: We said, alright, you have access to my subdirectory.
John Ellis: I'm going to give you access to my subdirectory.
John Ellis: And I'm going to tell you exactly what you can do in terms of reading files, deleting files, doing work on my computer.
John Ellis: But this is the same thing as…
John Ellis: an LLM at your command line, typing commands into the command line, asking you Can I run this command?
John Ellis: That's gonna be an important part. But very much running code, accessing data in that subdirectory on your computer. Writing files, writing that task splits.
John Ellis: If you don't have the right software to do a particular task, downloading and installing the software, so you can do that task.
John Ellis: This entirely changes, not just in terms of incremental capability, because now, It can go…
John Ellis: Run, write code, if it's not running, loop.
John Ellis: Until the code is running, Because it can see that it's running or not running.
John Ellis: It can see whether it's gone to an answer or has not gone to an answer. It closes the loop.
John Ellis: And can directly produce artifacts locally, that you would use. Make me a PowerPoint.
John Ellis: make me a… make me a, a, an Excel workbook.
John Ellis: and return it.
John Ellis: There.
John Ellis: So now things become observable.
John Ellis: If we have a good harness, then that allows us to see which files have been pulled up and put into context.
John Ellis: It will tell us which skills have been used and applied when.
John Ellis: So we can actually trace and see what it's doing, when it's doing it.
John Ellis: That would be a good harness.
John Ellis: It turns out.
John Ellis: That, in terms of model performance, it is no longer the case that one model is just better than another. It's the combination of model and harness.
John Ellis: That's what's being discussed now. Do you have a good agent harness that allows you to do these things and gives you the observability in order to do these tasks?
John Ellis: When Matt was talking before about allowing the computer to work for about 8 hours, what he was talking about, he gave it a task, gave it information, and said, write this code, work on it until it works.
John Ellis: Closed loop
John Ellis: And this is called the horizon. How far, how long can it work before it has to come back and say, I've lost the thread, I don't know what I'm doing anymore?
John Ellis: That used to be minutes, now it is hours, and if you're very, very careful, it can even be weeks.
John Ellis: For very complex problems.
John Ellis: That's what we're going to be talking about here in the following sessions. We're going to be going into skills, we're going to be going to how to write them, how to actually use these agents to solve your problems, and how to do it responsibly, and do it in a way that we don't fall into the traps that we just naturally have as humans.
John Ellis: So, I would say let's go ahead and, I've given you a whole bunch. I'd say let's go ahead and take a short break.